2019/content/slides/observe-understand-rabbitmq/index.md, before:

---
title: Observe and Understand RabbitMQ
summary: What happened when RabbitMQ became more observable? How does it work?
authors: []
tags: []
categories: []
date: "2019-11-04T11:50:00Z"
slides:
  # see available slides. options in layouts/slides/baseof.html
  height: 720
  theme: solarized
  width: 1280
  style: |
    .reveal a {
      color: #3274D9;
    }
    .reveal a:hover {
      color: #5296FF;
    }
    .reveal .hiviz-dark a {
      color: #F2CC0C;
    }
    .reveal .hiviz-dark a:hover {
      color: #FFE14A;
    }
  # https://github.com/hakimel/reveal.js/
  # https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/background
---

{{< slide class="hiviz-dark" background-video="/img/observable-systems/observe-understand-rabbitmq-intro-43.mp4" background-video-loop="true" background-size="cover" >}}

## Observe && <br> [Understand](#) <br> RabbitMQ
<span class="menu-title">INTRO</span>

{{< speaker_note >}}
* See RabbitMQ in a completely different light
* The goal is to understand RabbitMQ
* Have different discussions
* Improve RabbitMQ and Erlang together
* Relate to CNCF projects
{{< /speaker_note >}}

---

### RabbitMQ Core Engineer
<span class="menu-title">Gerhard Lazu</span>

<img src="/img/observable-systems/gerhard.png" height="400">

#### <i class="fab fa-twitter"></i> <a href="https://twitter.com/gerhardlazu" target="_blank">gerhardlazu</a> &nbsp; <i class="fab fa-github"></i> <a href="https://github.com/gerhard" target="_blank">gerhard</a>

---

### RabbitMQ for Kubernetes <br> Product Manager
<span class="menu-title">Michal Kuratczyk</span>

<img src="/img/observable-systems/mkuratczyk.jpeg" height="400">

#### <i class="fab fa-twitter"></i> <a href="https://twitter.com/MichalKuratczyk" target="_blank">MichalKuratczyk</a> &nbsp; <i class="fab fa-github"></i> <a href="https://github.com/mkuratczyk" target="_blank">mkuratczyk</a>

---

{{< slide background-video="/img/observable-systems/observe-understand-rabbitmq-live-43.mp4" background-color="#161719" background-size="contain" >}}
<span class="menu-title">Slides on your device</span>

---

{{< slide class="hiviz-dark" background-color="#161719">}}

<span class="menu-title">MANAGEMENT LIMITATIONS</span>

## [RABBITMQ MANAGEMENT LIMITATIONS](#)

**New metrics system in RabbitMQ 3.8**

**Understand like never before**

**More CLI power to you**

**What happens next?**

{{< speaker_note >}}

* What was the problem? Why have we invested so much time into observability?
* Until now, the Management plugin was the de facto tool to monitor your RabbitMQ

* **Unfortunately, in a failing or very busy cluster, Management UI is usually one of the first things to fail**

{{< /speaker_note >}}

---

{{< slide background-video="/img/observable-systems/rabbitmq-management-unresponsive-43.mp4" background-color="#161719" background-size="contain" >}}
<span class="menu-title">Management not loading</span>

{{< speaker_note >}}

* Here's the Management UI of a busy RabbitMQ cluster
* It takes a minute to load the page!
* Metrics are not available if you restart a node
* If you restart all nodes to resolve an issue, you probably can't do post-mortem anymore
* **External monitoring tool probably relies on the Management plugin API to collect the metrics as well**

{{< /speaker_note >}}

---

{{< slide background-image="/img/observable-systems/rabbitmq-exporter-duration-43.png" background-color="#161719" background-size="contain" >}}
<span class="menu-title">Management API response</span>

{{< speaker_note >}}

* This means that yur external tool will be affected by the same performance issues
* As you can see, it takes milliseconds to get the metrics if there is no load but 30-40 seconds on a busy cluster
* That means we can only collect metrics once a minute

{{< /speaker_note >}}

---

#### `rabbitmq-plugins enable rabbitmq_prometheus`
<span class="menu-title">New built-in plugin</span>

{{< speaker_note >}}

* Version 3.8 introduced a completely new plugin that provides Prometheus support and does not rely on the Management plugin
* **Let's compare the performance of this new plugin to what we saw before**

{{< /speaker_note >}}

---

{{< slide background-video="/img/observable-systems/rabbitmq-plugins-enable-prometheus.mp4" background-color="#161719" background-size="contain" >}}

<span class="menu-title">Enable built-in plugin</span>

{{< speaker_note >}}

* Version 3.8 introduced a completely new plugin that provides Prometheus support and does not rely on the Management plugin
* **Let's compare the performance of this new plugin to what we saw before**

{{< /speaker_note >}}

---

{{< slide background-image="/img/observable-systems/rabbitmq-exporter-vs-new-plugin-43.png" background-color="#161719" background-size="contain" >}}

<span class="menu-title">Faster responses</span>

{{< speaker_note >}}

* You can see how much faster this new plugin is
* Which means we can collect metrics every 10 or 15 seconds which is much more useful
* An important point is that you have to connect to each node individually to get all metrics
* **Now that we have a new, reliable, source of data, we also needed a new way to visualize that data**

{{< /speaker_note >}}

---

{{< slide background-image="/img/observable-systems/rabbitmq-overview-1.png" background-color="#161719" background-size="contain" >}}

<span class="menu-title">New RabbitMQ-Overview</span>

{{< speaker_note >}}

* Grafana is a great tool for the job
* RabbitMQ Overview dashboard shows roughly the same data you could find in the Management UI
* This dashboard is already available - once you enable the plugin, deploy Prometheus and Grafana, just import this dashboard and that's it**
* **Because all those metrics are collected from each node individually, we can easily spot imbalances**

{{< /speaker_note >}}

---

{{< slide background-image="/img/observable-systems/rebalance-queues-before-43.png" background-color="#161719" background-size="contain" >}}

<span class="menu-title">Spot queue imbalances</span>

{{< speaker_note >}}

* For example, here we can see the number of queue masters per node
* This is a very common issue since, by default, the node you are connected to becomes the master for newly declared queues
* It is also what you'll see after a rolling upgrade or restart of your cluster
* **Well, we now have an easy way to resolve this particular issue.**

{{< /speaker_note >}}

---

<span class="menu-title">Rebalance all queues</span>

#### `rabbitmq-queues rebalance all`

{{< speaker_note >}}

* We can rebalance some of the queues or all of them
* **If you look carefully, you can see when the command was executed**

{{< /speaker_note >}}

---

{{< slide background-image="/img/observable-systems/rebalance-queues-after-43.png" background-color="#161719" background-size="contain" >}}

<span class="menu-title">Evenly spread queues</span>

{{< speaker_note >}}

* **As you know RabbitMQ relies on Erlang for clustering**
* **Which means you need to monitor Erlang to get the full picture of what's going on**

{{< /speaker_note >}}

---

{{< slide background-video="/img/observable-systems/erlang-distribution-links-43.mp4" background-color="#161719" background-size="contain" >}}

<span class="menu-title">See node links</span>

{{< speaker_note >}}

* We have 6 connections in a 3-node cluster
* You can see if the links between nodes are up

{{< /speaker_note >}}

---

{{< slide background-video="/img/observable-systems/erlang-distribution-transfer-43.mp4" background-color="#161719" background-size="contain" >}}
<span class="menu-title">Data sent to peer</span>

{{< speaker_note >}}

* How much data is transmitted between each set of nodes
* **And much, much more.**

{{< /speaker_note >}}

---

{{< slide background-video="/img/observable-systems/data-in-port-driver-buffer-43.mp4" background-color="#161719" background-size="contain" >}}
<span class="menu-title">Data in port driver buffer</span>

{{< speaker_note >}}

* Here we zoom in on the data in port driver buffer
* Which likely doesn't tell you anything but it is a very important buffer
* Anything that needs to be transmitted between node, is added to this buffer
* This is actually explains why the Management plugin is slow in a busy cluster
* **So we have RabbitMQ and Erlang metrics. Do we need anything else? Yes!**

{{< /speaker_note >}}

---

{{< slide background-video="/img/observable-systems/perf-test-43.mp4" background-color="#161719" background-size="contain" >}}
<span class="menu-title">Perf-Test dashboard - v1</span>

{{< speaker_note >}}

* What really matters is the performance from the user perspective
* In this case, our users are RabbitMQ clients
* You should expose the metrics from your apps as well
* Even though this dashboard is v1, a version with better UX is in the works

{{< /speaker_note >}}

---

{{< slide background-image="/img/observable-systems/sharing-metrics-problem.png" background-color="#161719" background-size="contain" >}}
<span class="menu-title">Problem</span>

---

{{< slide background-video="/img/observable-systems/sharing-metrics-info.mp4" background-color="#161719" background-size="contain" >}}
<span class="menu-title">Info</span>

---

{{< slide background-video="/img/observable-systems/sharing-metrics-snapshot.mp4" background-color="#161719" background-size="contain" >}}
<span class="menu-title">Snapshot</span>

---

{{< slide class="hiviz-dark" background-color="#161719">}}

# [FIRST 3 TAKE AWAYS](#)

---

## [Upgrade](#) to RabbitMQ [3.8](#)

**Discover all the new features**

😱 Metricless Management 🤯

---

## [Enable & visualise](#) new metrics
<span class="menu-title">Start using new metrics</span>

**First step towards better conversations**

---

## [Share metrics](#) when asking for help
<span class="menu-title">Share snapshots</span>

**Help us help you!**

{{< speaker_note >}}

* Help us help you!
* Gerhard will now show you even more awesomeness

{{< /speaker_note >}}

---

{{< slide class="hiviz-dark" background-color="#161719">}}

<span class="menu-title">HOW TO UNDERSTAND</span>

RabbitMQ Management limitations

New metrics system in RabbitMQ 3.8

## [UNDERSTAND LIKE NEVER BEFORE](#)

**More CLI power to you**

**What happens next?**

{{< speaker_note >}}
Now that you are starting to understand how all this fits together,
let's dig deeper so that you can better appreciate the opportunities that this opens.
{{< /speaker_note >}}

---

## What happens in the <br>[Erlang Distribution](#)?
<span class="menu-title">What happens in inet_dist?</span>

Mirrored Classic Queue <br>vs Quorum Queue

---

## [Mirrored Classic Queue](#)
<br>

* Master `+2` Mirrors
* 100 msg/s @ 10KiB
* 1 Publisher [→](#) 1 Consumer
* 1 MiB / s constant message flow

---

{{< slide background-image="/img/observable-systems/erlang-distribution-mirrored-queue-rabbitmq-management-43.png" background-size="contain" >}}
<span class="menu-title">MCQ - Management</span>

---

{{< slide background-video="/img/observable-systems/erlang-distribution-mirrored-queue-43-part-1.mp4" background-color="#161719" background-size="contain" >}}
<span class="menu-title">MCQ - Erlang Distribution</span>

---

{{< slide background-video="/img/observable-systems/erlang-distribution-mirrored-queue-43-part-2.mp4" background-color="#161719" background-size="contain" >}}
<span class="menu-title">MCQ - Data sent to peer</span>

---

## [1 Mebibyte](#) of msg bodies

[**Mirrored Classic Queue**](#): Master `+2` Slaves

| Erlang Distribution Link | Traffic      |
| ------------------------ | ------------ |
| Master 0 → Mirror 1      | [2MB / s](#) |
| Mirror 1 → Mirror 2      | [1MB / s](#) |
| Mirror 2 → Master 0      | [1MB / s](#) |
| Master 0 → Mirror 2      | [1MB / s](#) |

---

## Why does <br>[Erlang Distribution traffic](#) <br>matter?
<span class="menu-title">Erlang Distribution traffic</span>

---

{{< slide class="hiviz-dark" background="url(/img/observable-systems/erlang-distribution-link-limit-10KB-43.png) center bottom / contain no-repeat #161719" >}}

## [470 MB/s](#) link max @ [10KB](#) in OTP [22](#)
<span class="menu-title">inet_tcp link limit @ 10KB</span>

---

{{< slide background="url(/img/observable-systems/erlang-otp-pr-2293-43.png) 50% 50% / contain no-repeat" >}}
<span class="menu-title">Erlang/OTP PR 2293</span>

---

## [Quorum Queue](#)
<br>

* Leader `+2` Followers
* 100 msg/s @ 10KiB
* 1 Publisher [→](#) 1 Consumer
* 1 MiB / s constant message flow

---

{{< slide background-image="/img/observable-systems/erlang-distribution-quorum-queue-43.png" background-color="#161719" background-size="contain" >}}
<span class="menu-title">QQ - Inter-node traffic</span>

---

## [Quorum Queue](#) 2.5x [less pressure](#)
on Erlang Distribution than Mirrored Classic Queue
<span class="menu-title">QQ 2.5x less pressure</span>

| MCQ Link | MCQ Traffic | QQ Link | QQ Traffic |
| -------- | ----------- | ------- | ---------- |
| M0 → M1  | 2MB / s     | L0 → F1 | 1MB / s    |
| M1 → M2  | 1MB / s     | L0 → F2 | 1MB / s    |
| M2 → M0  | 1MB / s     |         |            |
| M0 → M2  | 1MB / s     |         |            |

---

## Help me understand <br>[Quorum Queue](#) internals
<span class="menu-title">Understand QQ Raft</span>

**RabbitMQ-Quorum-Queues-Raft**

---

{{< slide background-video="/img/observable-systems/rabbitmq-qq-raft-43-part-1.mp4" background-color="#161719" background-size="contain" >}}
<span class="menu-title">Log entries committed / s</span>

---

{{< slide background-video="/img/observable-systems/rabbitmq-qq-raft-43-part-2.mp4" background-color="#161719" background-size="contain" >}}
<span class="menu-title">Log entry commit latency</span>

---

{{< slide background-video="/img/observable-systems/rabbitmq-qq-raft-43-part-3.mp4" background-color="#161719" background-size="contain" >}}
<span class="menu-title">Raft members with >5k entries</span>

---

## Hey Rabbit! <br>[Where is my memory?](#)
<span class="menu-title">Where is my memory?</span>

**Erlang-Memory-Allocators**

---

{{< slide background-video="/img/observable-systems/erlang-memory-allocators-43-part-1.mp4" background-color="#161719" background-size="contain" >}}
<span class="menu-title">Erlang-Memory-Allocators</span>

---

{{< slide background-video="/img/observable-systems/erlang-memory-allocators-43-part-2.mp4" background-color="#161719" background-size="contain" >}}
<span class="menu-title">binary_alloc</span>

---

{{< slide background-video="/img/observable-systems/erlang-memory-allocators-43-part-3.mp4" background-color="#161719" background-size="contain" >}}
<span class="menu-title">eheap_alloc</span>

---

{{< slide background-video="/img/observable-systems/erlang-memory-allocators-43-part-4.mp4" background-color="#161719" background-size="contain" >}}
<span class="menu-title">ets_alloc</span>

---

{{< slide background-video="/img/observable-systems/erlang-memory-allocators-43-part-5.mp4" background-color="#161719" background-size="contain" >}}
<span class="menu-title">All memory allocators</span>

---

## Discover other [dashboards](#)

<img data-src="/img/observable-systems/grafana-rabbitmq-org-43.png" />

---

## Make [dashboards](#)

<img data-src="/img/observable-systems/make-dashboards-43.png" />

---

{{< slide class="hiviz-dark" background-color="#161719">}}

<span class="menu-title">MORE CLI POWER TO YOU</span>

RabbitMQ Management limitations

New metrics system in RabbitMQ 3.8

Understand like never before

## [MORE CLI POWER TO YOU](#)

**What happens next?**

---

{{< slide background-video="/img/observable-systems/htop-43.mp4" background-color="#161719" background-video-loop="true" background-size="contain" >}}
<span class="menu-title">Remember htop?</span>

---

## [Observe](#) Erlang VM

**RabbitMQ [v3.8.0](#)**

`rabbitmq-diagnostics observer`

---

{{< slide background-video="/img/observable-systems/rabbitmq-diagnostics-observer-43-part-1.mp4" background-color="#161719" background-size="contain" >}}
<span class="menu-title">observer_cli home</span>

---

{{< slide background-video="/img/observable-systems/rabbitmq-diagnostics-observer-43-part-2.mp4" background-color="#161719" background-size="contain" >}}
<span class="menu-title">observer_cli home reductions</span>

---

{{< slide background-video="/img/observable-systems/rabbitmq-diagnostics-observer-43-part-3.mp4" background-color="#161719" background-size="contain" >}}
<span class="menu-title">observer_cli inspect process</span>

---

{{< slide background-video="/img/observable-systems/rabbitmq-diagnostics-observer-43-part-4.mp4" background-color="#161719" background-size="contain" >}}
<span class="menu-title">observer_cli ETS</span>

---

## [See](#) RabbitMQ events

**RabbitMQ [v3.8.0](#)**

`rabbitmq-diagnostics consume_event_stream`

---

{{< slide background-video="/img/observable-systems/rabbitmq-diagnostics-events-43.mp4" background-color="#161719" background-size="contain" >}}
<span class="menu-title">consume_event_stream</span>

---

{{< slide background-video="/img/observable-systems/rabbitmq-diagnostics-43.mp4" background-color="#161719" background-size="contain" >}}
<span class="menu-title">rabbitmq-diagnostics help</span>

---

{{< slide class="hiviz-dark" background-color="#161719">}}

<span class="menu-title">WHAT HAPPENS NEXT?</span>

RabbitMQ Management limitations

New metrics system in RabbitMQ 3.8

Understand like never before

More CLI power to you

## [WHAT HAPPENS NEXT?](#)

---

## Expose [more metrics](#)

and address high cardinality

<img data-src="/img/observable-systems/rabbitmq-prometheus-pr-9-43.png" />

---

## Build [new dashboards](#)

**Erlang-Microstate-Accounting**

<img data-src="/img/observable-systems/prometheus.erl-pr-98-43.png" />

---

{{< slide class="hiviz-dark" background="url(/img/observable-systems/loki-logs.png) 0 100% / cover no-repeat" >}}

## See [logs](#) together with metrics

I meant [**Events**](#)

<br><br><br><br><br><br><br><br>

---

## Try [OpenTelemetry](#)

<img data-src="/img/observable-systems/opentelemtry-43.png" />

---

{{< slide class="hiviz-dark" background-color="#161719">}}

# [LAST 3 TAKE AWAYS](#)

---

## Have [different conversations](#)

**Observe, snapshot & share**

---

## Aim to [understand and improve](#)
<span class="menu-title">Understand and improve</span>

**This is an infinite game**

---

## [Ask questions](#) in the [webinar](#)

**12th of December, 2019**

[@RabbitMQ](https://twitter.com/RabbitMQ)

Commit message:

Improve summary & abstract for Observe & Understand RabbitMQ

2019/content/slides/observe-understand-rabbitmq/index.md, after:

---
title: Observe and Understand RabbitMQ
summary: RabbitMQ 3.8 ships observability features that make it easy to understand what happens in the different layers of this complex, distributed stateful system. We will share why what we had didn't work, how we went about rethinking our approach to metrics and the unexpected benefits that we have uncovered while on this journey.
authors: []
tags: []
categories: []
date: "2019-11-04T11:50:00Z"
slides:
  # see available slides. options in layouts/slides/baseof.html
  height: 720
  theme: solarized
  width: 1280
  style: |
    .reveal a {
      color: #3274D9;
    }
    .reveal a:hover {
      color: #5296FF;
    }
    .reveal .hiviz-dark a {
      color: #F2CC0C;
    }
    .reveal .hiviz-dark a:hover {
      color: #FFE14A;
    }
  # https://github.com/hakimel/reveal.js/
  # https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/background
---

{{< slide class="hiviz-dark" background-video="/img/observable-systems/observe-understand-rabbitmq-intro-43.mp4" background-video-loop="true" background-size="cover" >}}

## Observe && <br> [Understand](#) <br> RabbitMQ
<span class="menu-title">INTRO</span>

{{< speaker_note >}}
* See RabbitMQ in a completely different light
* The goal is to understand RabbitMQ
* Have different discussions
* Improve RabbitMQ and Erlang together
* Relate to CNCF projects
{{< /speaker_note >}}

---

### RabbitMQ Core Engineer
<span class="menu-title">Gerhard Lazu</span>

<img src="/img/observable-systems/gerhard.png" height="400">

#### <i class="fab fa-twitter"></i> <a href="https://twitter.com/gerhardlazu" target="_blank">gerhardlazu</a> &nbsp; <i class="fab fa-github"></i> <a href="https://github.com/gerhard" target="_blank">gerhard</a>

---

### RabbitMQ for Kubernetes <br> Product Manager
<span class="menu-title">Michal Kuratczyk</span>

<img src="/img/observable-systems/mkuratczyk.jpeg" height="400">

#### <i class="fab fa-twitter"></i> <a href="https://twitter.com/MichalKuratczyk" target="_blank">MichalKuratczyk</a> &nbsp; <i class="fab fa-github"></i> <a href="https://github.com/mkuratczyk" target="_blank">mkuratczyk</a>

---

{{< slide background-video="/img/observable-systems/observe-understand-rabbitmq-live-43.mp4" background-color="#161719" background-size="contain" >}}
<span class="menu-title">Slides on your device</span>

---

{{< slide class="hiviz-dark" background-color="#161719">}}

<span class="menu-title">MANAGEMENT LIMITATIONS</span>

## [RABBITMQ MANAGEMENT LIMITATIONS](#)

**New metrics system in RabbitMQ 3.8**

**Understand like never before**

**More CLI power to you**

**What happens next?**

{{< speaker_note >}}

* What was the problem? Why have we invested so much time into observability?
* Until now, the Management plugin was the de facto tool to monitor your RabbitMQ

* **Unfortunately, in a failing or very busy cluster, Management UI is usually one of the first things to fail**

{{< /speaker_note >}}

---

{{< slide background-video="/img/observable-systems/rabbitmq-management-unresponsive-43.mp4" background-color="#161719" background-size="contain" >}}
<span class="menu-title">Management not loading</span>

{{< speaker_note >}}

* Here's the Management UI of a busy RabbitMQ cluster
* It takes a minute to load the page!
* Metrics are not available if you restart a node
* If you restart all nodes to resolve an issue, you probably can't do post-mortem anymore
* **External monitoring tool probably relies on the Management plugin API to collect the metrics as well**

{{< /speaker_note >}}

---

{{< slide background-image="/img/observable-systems/rabbitmq-exporter-duration-43.png" background-color="#161719" background-size="contain" >}}
<span class="menu-title">Management API response</span>

{{< speaker_note >}}

* This means that yur external tool will be affected by the same performance issues
* As you can see, it takes milliseconds to get the metrics if there is no load but 30-40 seconds on a busy cluster
* That means we can only collect metrics once a minute

{{< /speaker_note >}}

---

#### `rabbitmq-plugins enable rabbitmq_prometheus`
<span class="menu-title">New built-in plugin</span>

{{< speaker_note >}}

* Version 3.8 introduced a completely new plugin that provides Prometheus support and does not rely on the Management plugin
* **Let's compare the performance of this new plugin to what we saw before**

{{< /speaker_note >}}

---

{{< slide background-video="/img/observable-systems/rabbitmq-plugins-enable-prometheus.mp4" background-color="#161719" background-size="contain" >}}

<span class="menu-title">Enable built-in plugin</span>

{{< speaker_note >}}

* Version 3.8 introduced a completely new plugin that provides Prometheus support and does not rely on the Management plugin
* **Let's compare the performance of this new plugin to what we saw before**

{{< /speaker_note >}}

---

{{< slide background-image="/img/observable-systems/rabbitmq-exporter-vs-new-plugin-43.png" background-color="#161719" background-size="contain" >}}

<span class="menu-title">Faster responses</span>

{{< speaker_note >}}

* You can see how much faster this new plugin is
* Which means we can collect metrics every 10 or 15 seconds which is much more useful
* An important point is that you have to connect to each node individually to get all metrics
* **Now that we have a new, reliable, source of data, we also needed a new way to visualize that data**

{{< /speaker_note >}}

---

{{< slide background-image="/img/observable-systems/rabbitmq-overview-1.png" background-color="#161719" background-size="contain" >}}

<span class="menu-title">New RabbitMQ-Overview</span>

{{< speaker_note >}}

* Grafana is a great tool for the job
* RabbitMQ Overview dashboard shows roughly the same data you could find in the Management UI
* This dashboard is already available - once you enable the plugin, deploy Prometheus and Grafana, just import this dashboard and that's it**
* **Because all those metrics are collected from each node individually, we can easily spot imbalances**

{{< /speaker_note >}}

---

{{< slide background-image="/img/observable-systems/rebalance-queues-before-43.png" background-color="#161719" background-size="contain" >}}

<span class="menu-title">Spot queue imbalances</span>

{{< speaker_note >}}

* For example, here we can see the number of queue masters per node
* This is a very common issue since, by default, the node you are connected to becomes the master for newly declared queues
* It is also what you'll see after a rolling upgrade or restart of your cluster
* **Well, we now have an easy way to resolve this particular issue.**

{{< /speaker_note >}}

---

<span class="menu-title">Rebalance all queues</span>

#### `rabbitmq-queues rebalance all`

{{< speaker_note >}}

* We can rebalance some of the queues or all of them
* **If you look carefully, you can see when the command was executed**

{{< /speaker_note >}}

---

{{< slide background-image="/img/observable-systems/rebalance-queues-after-43.png" background-color="#161719" background-size="contain" >}}

<span class="menu-title">Evenly spread queues</span>

{{< speaker_note >}}

* **As you know RabbitMQ relies on Erlang for clustering**
* **Which means you need to monitor Erlang to get the full picture of what's going on**

{{< /speaker_note >}}

---

{{< slide background-video="/img/observable-systems/erlang-distribution-links-43.mp4" background-color="#161719" background-size="contain" >}}

<span class="menu-title">See node links</span>

{{< speaker_note >}}

* We have 6 connections in a 3-node cluster
* You can see if the links between nodes are up

{{< /speaker_note >}}

---

{{< slide background-video="/img/observable-systems/erlang-distribution-transfer-43.mp4" background-color="#161719" background-size="contain" >}}
<span class="menu-title">Data sent to peer</span>

{{< speaker_note >}}

* How much data is transmitted between each set of nodes
* **And much, much more.**

{{< /speaker_note >}}

---

{{< slide background-video="/img/observable-systems/data-in-port-driver-buffer-43.mp4" background-color="#161719" background-size="contain" >}}
<span class="menu-title">Data in port driver buffer</span>

{{< speaker_note >}}

* Here we zoom in on the data in port driver buffer
* Which likely doesn't tell you anything but it is a very important buffer
* Anything that needs to be transmitted between node, is added to this buffer
* This is actually explains why the Management plugin is slow in a busy cluster
* **So we have RabbitMQ and Erlang metrics. Do we need anything else? Yes!**

{{< /speaker_note >}}

---

{{< slide background-video="/img/observable-systems/perf-test-43.mp4" background-color="#161719" background-size="contain" >}}
<span class="menu-title">Perf-Test dashboard - v1</span>

{{< speaker_note >}}

* What really matters is the performance from the user perspective
* In this case, our users are RabbitMQ clients
* You should expose the metrics from your apps as well
* Even though this dashboard is v1, a version with better UX is in the works

{{< /speaker_note >}}

---

{{< slide background-image="/img/observable-systems/sharing-metrics-problem.png" background-color="#161719" background-size="contain" >}}
<span class="menu-title">Problem</span>

---

{{< slide background-video="/img/observable-systems/sharing-metrics-info.mp4" background-color="#161719" background-size="contain" >}}
<span class="menu-title">Info</span>

---

{{< slide background-video="/img/observable-systems/sharing-metrics-snapshot.mp4" background-color="#161719" background-size="contain" >}}
<span class="menu-title">Snapshot</span>

---

{{< slide class="hiviz-dark" background-color="#161719">}}

# [FIRST 3 TAKE AWAYS](#)

---

## [Upgrade](#) to RabbitMQ [3.8](#)

**Discover all the new features**

😱 Metricless Management 🤯

---

## [Enable & visualise](#) new metrics
<span class="menu-title">Start using new metrics</span>

**First step towards better conversations**

---

## [Share metrics](#) when asking for help
<span class="menu-title">Share snapshots</span>

**Help us help you!**

{{< speaker_note >}}

* Help us help you!
* Gerhard will now show you even more awesomeness

{{< /speaker_note >}}

---

{{< slide class="hiviz-dark" background-color="#161719">}}

<span class="menu-title">HOW TO UNDERSTAND</span>

RabbitMQ Management limitations

New metrics system in RabbitMQ 3.8

## [UNDERSTAND LIKE NEVER BEFORE](#)

**More CLI power to you**

**What happens next?**

{{< speaker_note >}}
Now that you are starting to understand how all this fits together,
let's dig deeper so that you can better appreciate the opportunities that this opens.
{{< /speaker_note >}}

---

## What happens in the <br>[Erlang Distribution](#)?
<span class="menu-title">What happens in inet_dist?</span>

Mirrored Classic Queue <br>vs Quorum Queue

---

## [Mirrored Classic Queue](#)
<br>

* Master `+2` Mirrors
* 100 msg/s @ 10KiB
* 1 Publisher [→](#) 1 Consumer
* 1 MiB / s constant message flow

---

{{< slide background-image="/img/observable-systems/erlang-distribution-mirrored-queue-rabbitmq-management-43.png" background-size="contain" >}}
<span class="menu-title">MCQ - Management</span>

---

{{< slide background-video="/img/observable-systems/erlang-distribution-mirrored-queue-43-part-1.mp4" background-color="#161719" background-size="contain" >}}
<span class="menu-title">MCQ - Erlang Distribution</span>

---

{{< slide background-video="/img/observable-systems/erlang-distribution-mirrored-queue-43-part-2.mp4" background-color="#161719" background-size="contain" >}}
<span class="menu-title">MCQ - Data sent to peer</span>

---

## [1 Mebibyte](#) of msg bodies

[**Mirrored Classic Queue**](#): Master `+2` Slaves

| Erlang Distribution Link | Traffic      |
| ------------------------ | ------------ |
| Master 0 → Mirror 1      | [2MB / s](#) |
| Mirror 1 → Mirror 2      | [1MB / s](#) |
| Mirror 2 → Master 0      | [1MB / s](#) |
| Master 0 → Mirror 2      | [1MB / s](#) |

---

## Why does <br>[Erlang Distribution traffic](#) <br>matter?
<span class="menu-title">Erlang Distribution traffic</span>

---

{{< slide class="hiviz-dark" background="url(/img/observable-systems/erlang-distribution-link-limit-10KB-43.png) center bottom / contain no-repeat #161719" >}}

## [470 MB/s](#) link max @ [10KB](#) in OTP [22](#)
<span class="menu-title">inet_tcp link limit @ 10KB</span>

---

{{< slide background="url(/img/observable-systems/erlang-otp-pr-2293-43.png) 50% 50% / contain no-repeat" >}}
<span class="menu-title">Erlang/OTP PR 2293</span>

---

## [Quorum Queue](#)
<br>

* Leader `+2` Followers
* 100 msg/s @ 10KiB
* 1 Publisher [→](#) 1 Consumer
* 1 MiB / s constant message flow

---

{{< slide background-image="/img/observable-systems/erlang-distribution-quorum-queue-43.png" background-color="#161719" background-size="contain" >}}
<span class="menu-title">QQ - Inter-node traffic</span>

---

## [Quorum Queue](#) 2.5x [less pressure](#)
on Erlang Distribution than Mirrored Classic Queue
<span class="menu-title">QQ 2.5x less pressure</span>

| MCQ Link | MCQ Traffic | QQ Link | QQ Traffic |
| -------- | ----------- | ------- | ---------- |
| M0 → M1  | 2MB / s     | L0 → F1 | 1MB / s    |
| M1 → M2  | 1MB / s     | L0 → F2 | 1MB / s    |
| M2 → M0  | 1MB / s     |         |            |
| M0 → M2  | 1MB / s     |         |            |

---

## Help me understand <br>[Quorum Queue](#) internals
<span class="menu-title">Understand QQ Raft</span>

**RabbitMQ-Quorum-Queues-Raft**

---

{{< slide background-video="/img/observable-systems/rabbitmq-qq-raft-43-part-1.mp4" background-color="#161719" background-size="contain" >}}
<span class="menu-title">Log entries committed / s</span>

---

{{< slide background-video="/img/observable-systems/rabbitmq-qq-raft-43-part-2.mp4" background-color="#161719" background-size="contain" >}}
<span class="menu-title">Log entry commit latency</span>

---

{{< slide background-video="/img/observable-systems/rabbitmq-qq-raft-43-part-3.mp4" background-color="#161719" background-size="contain" >}}
<span class="menu-title">Raft members with >5k entries</span>

---

## Hey Rabbit! <br>[Where is my memory?](#)
<span class="menu-title">Where is my memory?</span>

**Erlang-Memory-Allocators**

---

{{< slide background-video="/img/observable-systems/erlang-memory-allocators-43-part-1.mp4" background-color="#161719" background-size="contain" >}}
<span class="menu-title">Erlang-Memory-Allocators</span>

---

{{< slide background-video="/img/observable-systems/erlang-memory-allocators-43-part-2.mp4" background-color="#161719" background-size="contain" >}}
<span class="menu-title">binary_alloc</span>

---

{{< slide background-video="/img/observable-systems/erlang-memory-allocators-43-part-3.mp4" background-color="#161719" background-size="contain" >}}
<span class="menu-title">eheap_alloc</span>

---

{{< slide background-video="/img/observable-systems/erlang-memory-allocators-43-part-4.mp4" background-color="#161719" background-size="contain" >}}
<span class="menu-title">ets_alloc</span>

---

{{< slide background-video="/img/observable-systems/erlang-memory-allocators-43-part-5.mp4" background-color="#161719" background-size="contain" >}}
<span class="menu-title">All memory allocators</span>

---

## Discover other [dashboards](#)

<img data-src="/img/observable-systems/grafana-rabbitmq-org-43.png" />

---

## Make [dashboards](#)

<img data-src="/img/observable-systems/make-dashboards-43.png" />

---

{{< slide class="hiviz-dark" background-color="#161719">}}

<span class="menu-title">MORE CLI POWER TO YOU</span>

RabbitMQ Management limitations

New metrics system in RabbitMQ 3.8

Understand like never before

## [MORE CLI POWER TO YOU](#)

**What happens next?**

---

{{< slide background-video="/img/observable-systems/htop-43.mp4" background-color="#161719" background-video-loop="true" background-size="contain" >}}
<span class="menu-title">Remember htop?</span>

---

## [Observe](#) Erlang VM

**RabbitMQ [v3.8.0](#)**

`rabbitmq-diagnostics observer`

---

{{< slide background-video="/img/observable-systems/rabbitmq-diagnostics-observer-43-part-1.mp4" background-color="#161719" background-size="contain" >}}
<span class="menu-title">observer_cli home</span>

---

{{< slide background-video="/img/observable-systems/rabbitmq-diagnostics-observer-43-part-2.mp4" background-color="#161719" background-size="contain" >}}
<span class="menu-title">observer_cli home reductions</span>

---

{{< slide background-video="/img/observable-systems/rabbitmq-diagnostics-observer-43-part-3.mp4" background-color="#161719" background-size="contain" >}}
<span class="menu-title">observer_cli inspect process</span>

---

{{< slide background-video="/img/observable-systems/rabbitmq-diagnostics-observer-43-part-4.mp4" background-color="#161719" background-size="contain" >}}
<span class="menu-title">observer_cli ETS</span>

---

## [See](#) RabbitMQ events

**RabbitMQ [v3.8.0](#)**

`rabbitmq-diagnostics consume_event_stream`

---

{{< slide background-video="/img/observable-systems/rabbitmq-diagnostics-events-43.mp4" background-color="#161719" background-size="contain" >}}
<span class="menu-title">consume_event_stream</span>

---

{{< slide background-video="/img/observable-systems/rabbitmq-diagnostics-43.mp4" background-color="#161719" background-size="contain" >}}
<span class="menu-title">rabbitmq-diagnostics help</span>

---

{{< slide class="hiviz-dark" background-color="#161719">}}

<span class="menu-title">WHAT HAPPENS NEXT?</span>

RabbitMQ Management limitations

New metrics system in RabbitMQ 3.8

Understand like never before

More CLI power to you

## [WHAT HAPPENS NEXT?](#)

---

## Expose [more metrics](#)

and address high cardinality

<img data-src="/img/observable-systems/rabbitmq-prometheus-pr-9-43.png" />

---

## Build [new dashboards](#)

**Erlang-Microstate-Accounting**

<img data-src="/img/observable-systems/prometheus.erl-pr-98-43.png" />

---

{{< slide class="hiviz-dark" background="url(/img/observable-systems/loki-logs.png) 0 100% / cover no-repeat" >}}

## See [logs](#) together with metrics

I meant [**Events**](#)

<br><br><br><br><br><br><br><br>

---

## Try [OpenTelemetry](#)

<img data-src="/img/observable-systems/opentelemtry-43.png" />

---

{{< slide class="hiviz-dark" background-color="#161719">}}

# [LAST 3 TAKE AWAYS](#)

---

## Have [different conversations](#)

**Observe, snapshot & share**

---

## Aim to [understand and improve](#)
<span class="menu-title">Understand and improve</span>

**This is an infinite game**

---

## [Ask questions](#) in the [webinar](#)

**12th of December, 2019**

[@RabbitMQ](https://twitter.com/RabbitMQ)
